Bratseth/vectors search (#469)
vespa-engine/blog: _posts/2024-02-13-when-you-are-using-vectors-you-are-doing-search.md

---  
layout: post
title: "When you're using vectors you're doing search"
author: bratseth
date: '2024-02-13'
image: assets/2024-02-13-when-you-are-using-vectors-you-are-doing-search/coral.jpg
image_credit: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@neom?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">NEOM</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/an-aerial-view-of-a-body-of-water-D1jr0Mevs-c?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>
skipimage: true
tags: [vector, search]
excerpt: "Combining scale and quality takes more than vector similarity search"
---
The legends tell us that in the ancient times you could only put numbers in your databases. 
Then somebody invented the string, and
the revolutionary **string database** was born, giving you somewhere to stash these strings until you needed them.
But soon enough, the incumbent *number databases* realized that strings are really just lists of numbers 
and they could handle them just fine, so every database became a string database and nowadays we just call them databases, 
the end.

> No, I'm kidding - it wasn't the end, because there was a tiny problem: You want to be able to find the strings 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No, I'm kidding - it wasn't the end because there was a problem: You want to be able to find the strings 
```

> that are most relevant to some task at hand, and this is very, very, very non-trivial. To solve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that are most relevant to some task at hand, which is non-trivial. To solve
```

*that* problem, databases weren't very useful, so the **search engine** was born.

Why do we call them "search engines" and not "string databases"? Because the hard part, the important part, isn't

> to hold on to your string for later, but to *compute what's most relevant to a given task*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to hold on to your strings for later, but to *compute what's most relevant to a given task*.
```

and baselines may be missing entirely, but it might still be a good idea to make the best of the data you have.

### Let's not ask for too little to get the job done

So what does is take to create a quality solution involving vector embeddings?

- **Hybrid search**: If you are working with text, retrieving both lexically and by vector similarity is 
[superior to just one or the other](https://blog.vespa.ai/improving-zero-shot-ranking-with-vespa/): 
Lexical search lets you find specific data precisely, 
while vectors allows you to overcome vocabulary mismatch and retrieve by semantic similarity.
<br/><br/>Make sure to not take the lexical search too lightly - you need an engine that incorporates linguistic processing 
for the languages you are dealing with to do this well.

- **Structured data**: In any real application you won't just have vectors, but also structured data
going along with it. This can be everything from simple numbers or strings to complex collections and structs.
You need to be able to use this data flexibly and [efficiently](https://blog.vespa.ai/constrained-approximate-nearest-neighbor-search/) 
in queries, and to determine the relevance 

> of the documents to return.

Reviewer: This section goes into document retrieval, before documents are presented in the next paragraph, consider improving the transition from strings to structured data and document model?

Author: Good catch! Fixed, thanks!

- **Multiple vectors, collections of vectors**: So, you have a vector, some structured data, and
maybe some text - together a [document](https://docs.vespa.ai/en/reference/schema-reference.html#document) 
in search engine speak. Is that enough?
<br/><br/>Well, normally not.
For example, you might want to have an embedding for a title, a description and an image - 
all in the same document. Or, even if your data is very simple you must be able to switch to a 
new embedding while one is in use. And if you are dealing with text longer than a paragraph, 
a single embedding won't really work. You need one per chunk of text, 
or maybe even [one per token](https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/ColBERT).<br/><br/>
You need to be able to add multiple vector fields to your documents, and those may be a 

> [collection of vectors]((https://blog.vespa.ai/semantic-search-with-multi-vector-indexing/)), 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[collection of vectors](https://blog.vespa.ai/semantic-search-with-multi-vector-indexing/), 
```

not just a single one.

- **Ranking**: So, we have documents, that contains structured data, text, and vector fields. 
We retrieve a subset of them with a query which is a tree of conditions over the field.
Now, how do we rank them so that we end up with the very best ones? Ranking just by nearest 

> neighbor in some vector space won't do; it is disregarding all our other information.

Reviewer: This is a solid point that should be emphasized more in the text. An e-commerce search use case with multiple objectives beyond text relevance signals may exemplify this.

Author: Expanded it a bit - thanks!
